---

title: "2025 takeaways"
date: 2025-12-31
---
# 2025 takeaways in no particular order

## some things i learned: 
- categories 
- supervising a thesis 
- blogposting!
- lean4, `bv_decide` and fiddling with it 
- packing a reasonable artifact 
- managing open source contributions in a research agenda
- writing papers 
- leading a paper toward submission
- moving places 
- PR-ing and reviewing PRs 

## highlights 
- A lot of sewing, much more than last year! I feel like I can now confidently sew *everyday clothes* like trousers and shirts, and they turn out *wearable*, which makes me very very happy. I hope to find more people that want to get rid of fabric 😈
- Traveling: this year was a very lucky one - between work and leisure I got to visit a bunch of places I'd never been to (and never thought I would visit, like Taipei!). I'm very grateful for that. Our (short) trip to Sumatra was definitely one of the best things ever happened to me so far.  
- This year was challenging work-wise: I did not meet the expectations I had for myself in a lot of things I did (supervising, having a clear PhD agenda, understanding math, becoming a reliable *theory person*). It was frustrating and I was very nervous about work for a lot of the time. I hope that being consistent in my effort will at some point pay off. 
- Working towards my balance in Cambridge! I love living in such a small and green city, and I am trying to pick back up the little traditions I had growing up back in Italy, such as making Elderflower syrup. Also, my 93-year-old grandmother hopped on a flight and came visiting me - it was definitely one of the highlights of the year 🥰
- There's something about the connections we make living abroad: we're all far from home and suddenly find ourselves sharing the same context, (often) missing the same things, facing the same challenges (from a PhD to dealing with NHS and Ryanair), and somehow understanding each other deeply. I am grateful for the friends I am making. 
It reminds me of the connections I made during my first year of university, when (for many of us) it was time living *on our own* and in very little time we would find ourselves facing the same challenges and overcoming them together - whether it was cooking or passing an exam. 
- I finally managed to be consistent at painting and travelled with my small watercolour set, with which I am trying to pause and capture the beauty surrounding me. I am grateful for the memories in that little notebook!

## places i visited
- Isle of Skye
- Istanbul 
- Taiwan
- Singapore
- Indonesia 

it was a very very lucky year!

## love wins!